home.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Welcome!
nav_exclude: true
permalink: /
seo:
  type: Course
  name: Berkeley Class Site
---

# UC Berkeley CDSS Common Documentation

{% assign announcements = site.announcements | reverse %}
{% for announcement in announcements %}
{{ announcement }}
{% endfor %}

Just the Class is a GitHub Pages template developed for the purpose of quickly deploying course websites. In addition to serving plain web pages and files, it provides a boilerplate for:

- [announcements](announcements.md),
- a [course calendar](calendar.md),
- a [staff](staff.md) page,
- and a weekly [schedule](schedule.md).

Just the Class is a template that extends the popular [Just the Docs](https://github.com/just-the-docs/just-the-docs) theme, which provides a robust and thoroughly-tested foundation for your website. Just the Docs include features such as:

- automatic [navigation structure](https://just-the-docs.github.io/just-the-docs/docs/navigation-structure/),
- instant, full-text [search](https://just-the-docs.github.io/just-the-docs/docs/search/) and page indexing,
- and a set of [UI components](https://just-the-docs.github.io/just-the-docs/docs/ui-components) and authoring [utilities](https://just-the-docs.github.io/just-the-docs/docs/utilities).

## Getting Started

Getting started with Just the Class is simple.

1. Create a [new repository based on Just the Class](https://github.com/kevinlin1/just-the-class/generate).
1. Update `_config.yml` and `README.md` with your course information. [Be sure to update the url and baseurl](https://mademistakes.com/mastering-jekyll/site-url-baseurl/).
1. Configure a [publishing source for GitHub Pages](https://help.github.com/en/articles/configuring-a-publishing-source-for-github-pages). Your course website is now live!
1. Edit and create `.md` [Markdown files](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/) to add more content pages.

Just the Class has been used by instructors at Stanford University ([CS 161](https://stanford-cs161.github.io/winter2021/)), UC Berkeley ([Data 100](https://ds100.org/fa21/)), UC Santa Barbara ([CSW8](https://ucsb-csw8.github.io/s22/)), Northeastern University ([CS4530/5500](https://neu-se.github.io/CS4530-CS5500-Spring-2021/)), and Carnegie Mellon University ([17-450/17-950](https://cmu-crafting-software.github.io/)). Share your course website and find more examples in the [show and tell discussion](https://github.com/kevinlin1/just-the-class/discussions/categories/show-and-tell)!

### Local development environment

Just the Class requires no special Jekyll plugins and can run on GitHub Pages' standard Jekyll compiler. To setup a local development environment, clone your template repository and follow the GitHub Docs on [Testing your GitHub Pages site locally with Jekyll](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/setting-up-a-github-pages-site-with-jekyll/testing-your-github-pages-site-locally-with-jekyll).

Commit message:

clean up and reorder otter pages

home.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Welcome!
nav_exclude: true
permalink: /
seo:
  type: Course
  name: Berkeley Class Site
---

# UC Berkeley CDSS Common Documentation

{% assign announcements = site.announcements | reverse %}
{% for announcement in announcements %}
{{ announcement }}
{% endfor %}

## Documentation for tools developed or maintained by Seamless Learning, CDSS TAs, and staff

The Seamless Learning project proposes an open-source, light-weight, and sustainable suite of tools to integrate Research, Teaching & Learning (RTL) and custom course tool platforms. Today, there is a suite of custom course tools used primarily by EECS, Data Science, Statistics—the three undergraduate programs in the new College of Computing, Data, and Society (CDSS). Collectively, each year these dozens of tools are jointly developed by hundreds of Teaching Assistants (TAs) and reach thousands of students in a variety of courses. While custom course tools have proven their utility, we must support instructors and TAs across campus who are also managing high enrollments.

Overall project goals:

* Improve large classroom management,
* Enable equitable grading strategies, and
* Foster an educational technology community across campus. We're all here to teach and learn!
